 With this in mind, we can reevaluate the court scene at the end. Janie welcomes an association with the white women in the courtroom: "Eight or ten white women had come to look at her too . . . But they didn't seem too mad. It would be nice if she could make them know how it was instead of those menfolks" (185). She clearly understands her gender as a potential source of fellowship. As affiliation with gender becomes more attractive to Janie and the reader, racial affiliation becomes less so, illustrating the swing between allegiance to gender and allegiance to race that characterizes the "contrary instincts" in the novel. The black people in the courtroom are described in unpleasant, almost racist, terms, as if the narrator's voice has been contaminated by the opinions of white folks: "Packed tight like a case of celery, only much darker than that . . . The white part of the room got calmer the more serious it got, but a tongue storm struck the Negroes like wind among palm trees. They talked all of a sudden and all together like a choir and the top parts of their bodies moved on the rhythm of it. . . The palm tree dance began again among the Negroes in the back" (185 - 186). There is the repeated use of the term Negro to refer to black people, which, if not yet offensive, is at least overly distant and scientific-sounding. There is the tropical image of the wind and the palm tree, which suggests that black people are as uncivilized as a force of nature. And, given the already existing prejudices about black people being musical and given to dancing, it is problematic that their serious attempts at being heard are rendered ridiculous by the pervading dance metaphor: "They talked . . . and the top parts of their bodies moved on the rhythm of it," "The palm tree dance." 
	As expected by the previous analysis of Mrs. Turner and Tea Cake, the racial distancing produced by the narrator in Janie and the reader is tightly linked to the fact that the black people's behavior at this point is deeply sexist. They condemn Janie while refusing to listen to her version of events, and they claim (in an instance of free indirect speech): "[Tea Cake] had been good to that woman. No nigger woman ain't never been treated no better . . . Hanging was too good" (186). They refuse to empathize with Janie because of her gender, while the white women standing nearby present a ready source of empathy. After Janie's acquittal,  "the white women cried and stood around her like a protecting wall and the Negroes, with heads hung down, shuffled out and away . . . Nothing to do with the little that was left of the day but to visit the kind white friends who had realized her feelings and thank them" (188). Note the expression "realized her feelings." Janie is mostly thankful for the empathy and understanding that she was given by the "kind white friends," and which was denied to her by the black men in her community. Even though this is technically the narrator speaking, Janie's voice seems to be present as well. It is Janie who describes the white people as "kind."
	Although it might seem like it at times, as in the courtroom scene, Hurston is not painting the Goddesses' hair gold in her novel. As we have sought out to show, the instances of "contrary instincts" do not seem to be the product of internalized racism, but rather a conscious decision to bring out and hold up to scrutiny the two different forms of oppression and prejudice affecting black women. The novel's message would be that uniting under the banner of black liberation while disregarding the separate issue of black female liberation would be a mistake. 
